Summary: Using a personal domain, HTTPS, migrating from other services

## Migrating to Blot from other platforms

I've written scripts which import blog posts from Tumblr, Squarespace, Jekyll and Wordpress. I’ve not yet connected them to a web-interface so please [contact me](/contact) and we’ll run them on your blog.


## Menu

Each blog comes with a menu. You can add links to it on the settings page.

## Using a personal domain

Once you own a domain, add it to your account on [the settings page](/settings).

If you’d like to use a **subdomain** e.g blog.example.com or www.example.com create a ```CNAME``` record which points to ```blot.im```.

If you’d like to use an **apex domain** e.g. example.com then create an ```ALIAS``` record which points to ```blot.im```. I highly recommend using www.your-domain.com instead of an apex domain.


## Serving your blog over SSL/HTTPS

Plenty of people use [CloudFlare](http://cloudflare.com) to serve their blog on Blot over SSL at no additional cost. You will need your own domain.

1. Add your domain to CloudFlare
2. Point your domain on Cloudflare to Blot's server (```54.191.179.131```)
3. Enable CloudFlare's flexible SSL option.

Please remember to transfer all of your other DNS records to Cloudflare. If you'd like to redirect all HTTP traffic to HTTPS, you can [configure that on Cloudflare](https://support.cloudflare.com/hc/en-us/articles/200170536-How-do-I-redirect-all-visitors-to-HTTPS-SSL-).

## Redirects

You can set up URL redirects on the [redirects page](/redirects). This is useful for migrating an existing blog to Blot. The [404](/404s) log page will help you work out what needs to be redirected. You can use Regular Expressions to match multiple routes.